===== SOURCE PAGE 14 =====


   BIOLOGY

   4.3.1 Law of Independent Assortment

   In the dihybrid cross (Figure 4.7).the phenotypes round,yellow;
   wrinkled,yellow;round,green and wrinkled,green appeared in the
   ratio9:3:3:1.Sucharatiowasobservedforseveralpairsofcharacters
   thatMendelstudied.
   Theratioof9:3:3:1canbe derived as a combination series of3yellow:
   1green,with 3round:1 wrinkled.Thisderivation canbe written
   as follows:
   (3Round:1Wrinkled)(3Yellow:1Green)=9Round,Yellow:3
   Wrinkled,Yellow:3Round,Green:1Wrinkled,Green
   Based upon such observations ondihybridcrosses(crossesbetween
   plantsdifferingintwotraits)Mendelproposed a second set of generalisations
   thatwecallMendel'sLawofIndependentAssortment.Thelawstatesthat

   of characters is independent of theotherpairofcharacters'.
   The Punnett square can be effectively used to understand the
   independent segregation ofthe two pairs of genes during meiosis and
   the production of eggs and pollen in theF,RrYyplant.Considerthe
   segregationofonepairofgenesRandr.Fiftypercentof thegametes
   have thegene Rand theother5opercenthave r.Nowbesideseach
   gamete having either Ror r,it should also have the alleleYory.The
   important thing to remember here is that segregation of50percent R

   Y and 50per centy.Therefore,50per cent of the r bearing gametes
   hasYand theother50percenthasy.Similarly.50per cent oft heR
   bearinggameteshasYand theother5opercenthasy.Thus there are

   The four typesareRY,Ry.rYandryeachwithafrequencyof25per
   centor1/4ofthetotalgametesproduced.Whenyouwritedownthe
   four types of eggs and pollen on the two sides ofa Punnett square it is
   very easy to derive the composition of the zygote sth at give rise to the
   Fplants(Figure4.7).Althoughthereare16squareshowmany

   downintheformatgiven.
   Canyou,usingthePunnettsquaredataworkoutthegenotypicratio
   at the F,stage and fill in the format given? Is the genotypic ratio
   also 9:3:3:1?

   64

   Their expected Phenotypes

   S.No.
   Genotypes found in F

   4.3.2 Chromosomal TheoryofInheritance

   Mendelpublishedhisworkoninheritanceofcharactersin1865but
   for several reasons,it remained unrecognised till 19oo.Firstly,

   Reprint2026-27

===== SOURCE PAGE 15 =====


   PRINCIPLESOFINHERITANCE ANDVARIATION

   communicationwasnoteasy(asitisnow)inthosedaysandhiswork
   could not bewidelypublicised.Secondly.his conceptofgenes(or
   factors,inMendel'swords)asstableand discrete units that controlled
   theexpressionoftraitsand,ofthepairofalleleswhichdidnotblend
   with eachother,wasnotacceptedbyhis contemporaries a san
   explanation for the apparently continuous variation seen innature.
   Thirdly,Mendel'sapproachofusingmathematicstoexplainbiological
   phenomena was totally new and unacceptable tom any ofthe
   biologistsofhistime.Finally,thoughMendel'sworksuggested that
   factors(genes)were discreteunits,he could not provide any physical
   proof for the existence of factors or say what they were made of.
   In 19o0,three Scientists(de Vries,Correns and von Tschermak)
   independently rediscovered Mendel's result son the inheritance of
   characters.Also,by this time due to advancements in microscopy that
   weretakingplace,scientistswereabletocarefullyobservecell division.
   This led to the discovery of structures in the nucleus that appeared to
   double and dividejustbeforeeachcelldivision.Thesewere called
   chromosomes(coloredbodies,astheywerevisualisedbystaining).By
   1902,thechromosomemovement during meiosis had been worked out.
   Walter Sutton and Theodore Boveri noted that the behaviour of
   chromosomes was parallel to the behaviour of gene sand used
   chromosome movement(Figure 4.8)to explain Mendel's laws (Table 4.3).
   Recall that you have studied the behaviour of chromosomes during mitosis
   (equational division)and during meiosis (reduction division).The
   important things to remember are that chromosomes as well as genes
   occurinpairs.Thetwoallelesof a gene pair are located on homologous
   sitesonhomologouschromosomes.

   MeiosisI
   anaphase
   Biv a lent

   Germ cells
   Meiosis II
   anaphase

   G2

   Q00

   000

   65

   Figure4.8Meiosis and germ cell formation in a cell with four chromosomes.
   Can you see how chromosomes segregate when germ cells
   areformed?

   Reprint2026-27