===== SOURCE PAGE 27 =====


   PRINCIPLESOFINHERITANCE ANDVARIATION

   SUMMARY

   Genetics is a branch of biology which deals with principlesofinheritance
   anditspractices.Progenyresemblingtheparentsinmorphological and
   physiologicalfeatureshasattractedtheattentionofmanybiologists.
   Mendel was the first to study this phenomenon systematically. While
   studying the pattern ofinheritance in pea plants of contrasting
   characters,Mendel proposed the principles ofinheritance,which are
   today referred to as Mendel's Laws of Inheritance'.He proposed that
   thefactors'(laternamed asgenes)regulatingthe characters are found
   inpairs known as alleles.Heobserved that the expression ofthe
   characters in the offspring follow a definite pattern indifferent-first
   generations(F).second(F.)and so on.Some characters are dominant
   over others.Thedominantcharacters are expressed when factors are
   in heterozygous condition (Law of Dominance).The recessive characters
   are only expressed in homozygous conditions.The characters never
   blend in heterozygous condition.A recessive character that was not

   becomes homozygous.Hence,characters segregate while formation of
   gametes (Law of Segregation).
   Notallcharactersshowtruedominance.Somecharacters show
   incomplete,and some showco-dominance.When Mendel studied the
   inheritance oftwo characters together,itwas found that the factors
   independently as sort and combine in all per mutation sand
   combinations(LawofIndependentAssortment).Differentcombinations
   of gametes are theoretically represented in a square tabular form known
   as Punnett Square'.The factors(nowknown as gene) on chromosomes
   regulating the characters are called the genotype and the physical
   expression ofthe chr a rac ter sis called phenotype.
   After knowing that the genes are located on thechromosomes,a
   good correlation was drawn between Mendel'slaws:segregation and
   assortmentofchromosomesduringmeiosis.TheMendel'slaws were
   extendedintheformof'ChromosomalTheoryofInheritance'.Later,it
   was found that Mendel's law of independent assortment does not hold
   true for thegenesthatwerelocatedonthesamechromosomes.These
   genes were called as linked genes 'Closely located genes assorted
   together,and distantly located genes,due to recombination,assorted
   independently.Linkage maps,therefore,corresponded to arrangement
   of genes on a chromosome.
   Many genes were linked to sexes also,and called as sex-linked
   genes.The two sexes(maleand female)were found to have a set of
   chromosomeswhichwerecommon,andanother set which was
   different.Thechromosomeswhichweredifferentin two sexes were
   named as sex chromosomes.The remaining set was named as
   autosomes.In humans,anormalfemalehas 22pairsofautosomes
   andapairofsexchromosomes(Xx).Amalehas22pairsofautosomes
   and apairofsexchromosomeasXY.In chicken,sexchromosomesin
   male are ZZ,and in females are ZW.
   Mutation is defined as change in thegeneticmaterial.Apoint
   mutationisachangeofasinglebasepairinDNA.Sickle-cellanemiais
   causedduetochangeofonebaseinthegenecodingforbeta-chainof
   hemoglobin.Inheritable mutations can be studied by generating a
   pedigree ofa family.Somemutations involve changes in whole set of

   77

   Reprint2026-27

===== SOURCE PAGE 28 =====


   BIOLOGY

   chromosomes(polyploidy)orchangein a subset of chromosome number
   (aneuploidy). This helped in understanding the mutational basis of
   geneticdisorders.Down'ssyndrome isdue to trisomy of chromosome 21.
   where there isan extra copy of chromosome 21and consequently the
   total number ofchromosomebecomes47.In Turner's syndrome,oneX
   chromosome is missing and the sex chromosome is as Xo.and in
   Klinefelter's syndrome,the condition isXXY.Thesecan be easily studied
   by analysis ofKaryotypes.

   EXERCISES

   Mention the advantages of selectingpeaplantforexperimentbyMendel.
   1.
   Differentiatebetweenthefollowing-
   2.
   (a)Dominance and Recessive
   (b)Homozygous and Heterozygous
   (c)Monohybrid and Dihybrid.
   A diploid organism is heterozygous for 4loci.howmany types of gametes
   3.
   can be produced?
   Explain the Law of Dominance using a monohybrid cross.
   4.
   Define and design a test-cross.
   5.
   UsingaPunnettSquare,workoutthe distribution of phenotypic features
   6.
   in the first filial generation after across between a homozygous female
   and a heterozygous male for a single locus.
   When a cross in made between tall plantwithyellowseeds(TtYy)and
   7.
   tall plant with green seed(Ttyy).whatproportionsofphenotypein the
   offspring could be expected tobe
   (a) tall and green.
   (b) dwarf and green.
   Two heterozygous parents are crossed.If the two loci are linked what
   8.
   would be the distribution of phenotypic features inF,generation fora
   dibybrid cross?
   Briefly mention the contribution of T.H.Morgan in genetics.
   9.
   What is pedigree analysis?Suggest how such an analysis,can be useful.
   10.
   How is sex determined in human beings?
   11.
   A child hasbloodgroupO.IfthefatherhasbloodgroupAandmother
   12.
   bloodgroupB,workoutthegenotypesof the parents and the possible
   genotypes of the other offsprings.
   13.Explainthefollowingtermswithexample
   (a) Co-dominance
   (b)Incomplete dominance
   Whatispointmutation?Give oneexample.
   14.
   Who had proposed thechromosomaltheoryoftheinheritance?
   15.

   78

   Mentionanytwoautosomalgeneticdisorderswiththeirsymptoms.
   16.

   Reprint2026-27