===== SOURCE PAGE 8 =====


   BIOLOGY

   genotypet.Asa result ofrandomfertilisation,theresultantzygotes can
   be of thegenotypesTT,Tt or tt.
   FromthePunnettsquareitiseasilyseenthat1/4hoftherandom
   fertilisationsleadtoTT,1/2lead toTtand1/4htott.ThoughtheF
   have a genotype ofTt,but the phenotypic character seen is‘tall'.At F
   3/4thof theplantsaretall,wheresomeof them are TT while others are
   Tt.Externallyitisnotpossibletodistinguishbetweentheplantswith
   the genotypes TT and Tt.Hence,withinthegenopyticpairTtonlyone
   characterT'tallisexpressed.HencethecharacterTor‘tall'issaid to
   dominateovertheotheralleletor'dwarf'character.Itisthusduetothis
   dominanceofonecharacterovertheotherthatalltheF,aretall(though

   genotypically1/2areTt and only1/4thareTT).Thisleads to a phenotypic
   ratioof3/4tall:(1/4TT+1/2Tt)and1/4tt,i.e.,a3:1ratio,buta
   genotypicratioof1:2:1.
   The1/4:1/2:1/4ratio ofTT:Tt:ttismathematicallycondensable
   totheformofthebinomialexpression(ax+by)²,thathasthegametes
   bearinggenesTortinequalfrequencyof/2.Theexpressionisexpanded
   as given below:

   Mendel self-pollinated the Fpl ant sand found that dwarf F,plants
   continued to generate dwarf plants in Fand Fgenerations.Heconcluded

   he would have got had he self-pollinated a tall Fplant?
   From the pre cee ding paragraphs itis clear that though thegenotypic
   ratios can be calculated using mathematical probability,by simply looking
   at thephenotypeofadominanttrait,itisnotpossibletoknow the
   genotypiccomposition.Thatis,forexample,whetheratall plant from F
   or F,has TT or Tt composition, cannot be predicted.Therefore,to determine
   the genotype of a tall plant at F,Mendel crossed the tall plant from F
   with a dwarfplant.Thishe called a testcross.Ina typical testcross an

   genotype is to be determined)iscrossedwiththerecessiveparent instead
   of self-crossing.Theprogenies of such a cross can easily be analysed to
   predict the genotype ofthetestorganism.Figure4.5showstheresultsof
   typical testcrosswherevioletcolourflower(V)isdominantoverwhite
   colourflower(v).

   58

   UsingPunnettsquare,trytofindoutthenatureofoffspringofatestcross.

   Whatratiodidyouget?

   Usingthegenotypesofthiscross,canyougiveageneraldefinitionfora
   testcross?

   Reprint2026-27

===== SOURCE PAGE 9 =====


   PRINCIPLESOFINHERITANCE AND VARIATION

   Homozygous
   recessive

   Homozygous
   recessive

   Ww

   Ww
   Ww

   Ww
   Ww

   -WW

   Ww-

   Dominant Phenotype
   (Genotypeunknown)

   Ww

   Result
   All flowers are violet

   Half ofthe flowers are violet and
   half ofthe flowers arewhite.

   Interpretation
   Unknownflower
   is homozygous dominant

   Unknownflower is heterozygous

   Figure 4.5 Diagrammatic representation ofa test cross

   Based on his observation son monohybrid crosses Mendel proposed
   two general rules to consolidate his understanding ofinheritance in
   monohybrid crosses.Today these rules are called the Principles or
   LawsofInheritance:theFirst Law or Law of Dominance and the
   SecondLaworLawofSegregation.

   4.2.1 Law of Dominance

   Characters arecontrolledbydiscreteunitscalledfactors.
   i)
   Factors occur in pairs.
   (ii)
   In a dissimilar pair of factors one member ofthe pair dominates
   (iii)
   (dominant) theother(recessive).
   The law of dominance is used to explain the expression of only oneof
   the parental charactersinamonohybridcrossintheF,and the expression
   of both intheF.It also explains the proportion of3:1obtained atthe F

   4.2.2 Law of Segregation

   This law is based on the fact that the alleles do not show any blending
   and that both the characters are recovered as such in the Fgeneration
   though oneof these isnotseenattheF,stage.Thoughtheparentscontain
   twoallelesduringgameteformation,thefactorsorallelesofapairsegregate
   from each other such that a gamete receives only oneof thetwofactors.
   Of course, a homozygous parent produces all gametes that are similar
   while a heterozygous one produces two kinds of gametes each having
   oneallelewithequalproportion.

   59

   Reprint2026-27