--- PAGE 17 ---
120
BIOLOGY
from the ovaries opens into the cloaca separately. A mature female can
lay 2500 to 3000 ova at a time. Fertilisation is external and takes place in
water. Development involves a larval stage called tadpole. Tadpole
undergoes metamorphosis to form the adult.
Frogs are beneficial for mankind because they eat insects and protect
the crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance because these serve as an
important link of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. In some
countries the muscular legs of frog are used as food by man.
SUMMARY
Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems split up the work in a way that ensures
the survival of the body as a whole and exhibit division of labour. A tissue is
defined as group of cells along with intercellular substances performing one or
more functions in the body. Epithelia are sheet like tissues lining the body’s surface
and its cavities, ducts and tubes. Epithelia have one free surface facing a body
fluid or the outside environment. Their cells are structurally and functionally
connected at junctions.
Diverse types of connective tissues bind together, support, strengthen, protect,
and insulate other tissue in the body. Soft connective tissues consist of protein
fibres as well as a variety of cells arranged in a ground substance. Cartilage, bone,
blood, and adipose tissue are specialised connective tissues. Cartilage and bone
are both structural materials. Blood is a fluid tissue with transport functions.
Adipose tissue is a reservoir of stored energy. Muscle tissue, which can contract
(shorten) in response to stimulation, helps in movement of the body and specific
body parts. Skeletal muscle is the muscle tissue attached to bones. Smooth muscle
is a component of internal organs. Cardiac muscle makes up the contractile walls
of the heart. Connective tissue covers all three types of tissues. Nervous tissue
exerts greatest control over the response of body. Neurons are the basic units of
nervous tissue.
Earthworm, Cockroach and Frog show characteristic features in body
organisation. In Pheretima posthuma (earthworm), the body is covered by cuticle.
All segments of its body are alike except the 14th, 15th and 16th segment, which are
thick and dark and glandular, forming clitellum. A ring of S-shaped chitinous
setae is found in each segment. These setae help in locomotion. On the ventral
side spermathecal openings are present in between the grooves of 5 and 6, 6 and
7, 7 and 8 and 8 and 9 segments. Female genital pores are present on 14th segment
and male genital pores on 18th segment. The alimentary canal is a narrow tube
made of mouth, buccal cavity, pharynx, gizzard, stomach, intestine and anus.
The blood vascular system is of closed type with heart and valves. Nervous system
is represented by ventral nerve cord. Earthworm is hermaphorodite. Two pairs of
For more FREE Downloads please visit https://www.aspirationsinstitute.com/free-downloads/
Source: NCERT Publications

--- PAGE 18 ---
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS
121
testes occur in the 10th and 11th segment, respectively. A pair of ovaries are present
on 12 and 13th intersegmental septum. It is a protandrous animal with cross-
fertilisation. Fertilisation and development take place in cocoon secreted by the
glands of clitellum.
The body of Cockroach (Periplaneta americana) is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. It is divided into head, thorax and abdomen. Segments bear jointed
appendages. There are three segments of thorax, each bearing a pair of walking
legs. Two pairs of wings are present, one pair each on 2nd and 3rd segment. There
are ten segments in abdomen. Alimentary canal is well developed with a mouth
surrounded by mouth parts, a pharynx, oesophagus, crop, gizzard, midgut,
hindgut and anus. Hepatic caecae are present at the junction of foregut and
midgut. Malpighian tubules are present at the junction of midgut and hindgut
and help in excretion. A pair of salivary gland is present near crop. The blood
vascular system is of open type. Respiration takes place by network of tracheae.
Trachea opens outside with spiracles. Nervous system is represented by
segmentally arranged ganglia and ventral nerve cord. A pair of testes is present in
4th-6th segments and ovaries in 2nd-6th segments. Fertilisation is internal. Female
produces 9-10 ootheca bearing developing embryos. After rupturing of single
ootheca sixteen young ones, called nymphs come out.
The Indian bullfrog, Rana tigrina, is the common frog found in India. Body is
covered by skin. Mucous glands are present in the skin which is highly vascularised
and helps in respiration in water and on land. Body is divisible into head and trunk.
A muscular tongue is present, which is bilobed at the tip and is used in capturing
the prey. The alimentary canal consists of oesophagous, stomach, intestine and
rectum, which open into the cloaca. The main digestive glands are liver and pancreas.
It can respire in water through skin and through lungs on land. Circulatory system
is closed with single circulation. RBCs are nucleated. Nervous system is organised
into central, peripheral and autonomic. The organs of urinogenital system are kidneys
and urinogenital ducts, which open into the cloaca. The male reproductive organ is
a pair of testes. The female reproductive organ is a pair of ovaries. A female lays
2500-3000 ova at a time. The fertilisation and development are external. The eggs
hatch into tadpoles, which metamorphose into frogs.
EXERCISES
1.
Answer in one word or one line.
(i)
Give the common name of Periplanata americana.
(ii)
How many spermathecae are found in earthworm?
(iii)
What is the position of ovaries in cockroach?
(iv)
How many segments are present in the abdomen of cockroach?
(v)
Where do you find Malpighian tubules?
For more FREE Downloads please visit https://www.aspirationsinstitute.com/free-downloads/
Source: NCERT Publications

--- PAGE 19 ---
122
BIOLOGY
2.
Answer the following:
(i)
What is the function of nephridia?
(ii)
How many types of nephridia are found in earthworm based on
their location?
3.
Draw a labelled diagram of the reproductive organs of an earthworm.
4.
Draw a labelled diagram of alimentary canal of a cockroach.
5.
Distinguish between the followings
(a)
Prostomium and peristomium
(b)
Septal nephridium and pharyngeal nephridium
6.
What are the cellular components of blood?
7.
What are the following and where do you find them in animal body.
(a)
Chondriocytes
(b)
Axons
(c)
Ciliated epithelium
8.
Describe various types of epithelial tissues with the help of labelled diagrams.
9.
Distinguish between
(a)
Simple epithelium and compound epithelium
(b)
Cardiac muscle and striated muscle
(c)
Dense regular and dense irregular connective tissues
(d)
Adipose and blood tissue
(e)
Simple gland and compound gland
10.
Mark the odd one in each series:
(a)
Areolar tissue; blood; neuron; tendon
(b)
RBC; WBC; platelets; cartilage
(c)
Exocrine; endocrine; salivary gland; ligament
(d)
Maxilla; mandible; labrum; antennae
(e)
Protonema; mesothorax; metathorax; coxa
11.
Match the terms in column I with those in column II:
Column I
Column II
(a) Compound epithelium
(i)
Alimentary canal
(b) Compound eye
(ii)
Cockroach
(c)
Septal nephridia
(iii)
Skin
(d) Open circulatory system
(iv)
Mosaic vision
(e)
Typhlosole
(v)
Earthworm
(f)
Osteocytes
(vi)
Phallomere
(g)
Genitalia
(vii)
Bone
12.
Mention breifly about the circulatory system of earthworm
13.
Draw a neat diagram of digestive system of frog.
14.
Mention the function of the following
(a)
Ureters in frog
(b)
Malpighian tubules
(c)
Body wall in earthworm
For more FREE Downloads please visit https://www.aspirationsinstitute.com/free-downloads/
Source: NCERT Publications

