=====OUTPAGE 1=====
Ecosystem
Ch 12 ECOSYSTEM - Chapter Opener
Chapter contents (as printed on the opener page): 12.1 Ecosystem - Structure and Function; 12.2 Productivity;
12.3 Decomposition; 12.4 Energy Flow; 12.5 Ecological Pyramids.
An ecosystem can be visualised as a functional unit of nature, where living organisms interact among
themselves and also with the surrounding physical environment.
(cid:127) Ecosystem varies greatly in size - from a small pond to a large forest or a sea.
(cid:127) Many ecologists regard the entire biosphere as a global ecosystem, as a composite of all local ecosystems on
Earth.
Since this system is too much big and complex to be studied at one time, it is convenient to divide it into two
basic categories, namely terrestrial and aquatic.
Category Examples (NCERT)
Terrestrial ecosystems Forest, grassland and desert
Aquatic ecosystems Pond, lake, wetland, river and estuary
Man-made ecosystems Crop fields and an aquarium may also be considered as man-made ecosystems
We will first look at the structure of the ecosystem, in order to appreciate the input (productivity), transfer of
energy (food chain/web, nutrient cycling) and the output (degradation and energy loss). We will also look at
the relationships - cycles, chains, webs - that are created as a result of these energy flows within the system and
their inter-relationship.
12.1 ECOSYSTEM - STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
In earlier classes, you have looked at the various components of the environment - abiotic and biotic. You studied
how the individual biotic and abiotic factors affected each other and their surrounding. Let us look at these
components in a more integrated manner and see how the flow of energy takes place within these components of
the ecosystem.
Interaction of biotic and abiotic components results in a physical structure that is characteristic for each type of
ecosystem.
Component What it comprises (Summary)
Abiotic components Inorganic materials - air, water and soil
Biotic components Producers, consumers and decomposers
Species composition: identification and enumeration of plant and animal species of an ecosystem gives its
species composition.
Stratification: vertical distribution of different species occupying different levels is called stratification. For
example, trees occupy the top vertical strata or layer of a forest, shrubs the second, and herbs and grasses
occupy the bottom layers.
[NOTE] Species composition and stratification are the two main structural features of an ecosystem (stated
explicitly in the Summary).
The components of the ecosystem are seen to function as a unit when you consider the following four aspects, in
NCERT's order:
Productivity
1
Decomposition
2
Energy flow
3
Nutrient cycling
4
=====OUTPAGE 2=====
12.1 The pond as an example of an aquatic ecosystem
To understand the ethos of an aquatic ecosystem let us take a small pond as an example. This is fairly a
self-sustainable unit and rather simple example that explains even the complex interactions that exist in an aquatic
ecosystem. A pond is a shallow water body in which all the above-mentioned four basic components of an
ecosystem are well exhibited.
Component in the pond What it is
Abiotic The water with all the dissolved inorganic and organic substances and the rich soil deposit
at the bottom of the pond. The solar input, the cycle of temperature, day-length and other
climatic conditions regulate the rate of function of the entire pond
Autotrophic components The phytoplankton, some algae and the floating, submerged and marginal plants found at
the edges
Consumers The zooplankton, the free swimming and bottom dwelling forms
Decomposers The fungi, bacteria and flagellates especially abundant in the bottom of the pond
This system performs all the functions of any ecosystem and of the biosphere as a whole, i.e., conversion of
inorganic into organic material with the help of the radiant energy of the sun by the autotrophs; consumption of
the autotrophs by heterotrophs; decomposition and mineralisation of the dead matter to release them back for
reuse by the autotrophs. These events are repeated over and over again.
There is a unidirectional movement of energy towards the higher trophic levels and its dissipation and loss as
heat to the environment.
12.2 PRODUCTIVITY
A constant input of solar energy is the basic requirement for any ecosystem to function and sustain.
Primary production is defined as the amount of biomass or organic matter produced per unit area over a
-2 -2
time period by plants during photosynthesis. It is expressed in terms of weight (g m ) or energy (kcal m ).
-2 -1 -2 -1
The rate of biomass production is called productivity. It is expressed in terms of g m yr or (kcal m ) yr
to compare the productivity of different ecosystems.
Productivity can be divided into gross primary productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP).
Term Definition
Gross primary productivity (GPP) The rate of production of organic matter during photosynthesis. A considerable
amount of GPP is utilised by plants in respiration
Net primary productivity (NPP) Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R), i.e. GPP - R = NPP. NPP is
the available biomass for the consumption to heterotrophs (herbivores and
decomposers)
Secondary productivity Defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by consumers
[NOTE] NCERT's parenthetical spells it "herbiviores"; the fact is that NPP is available to herbivores AND
decomposers. The Summary also states secondary productivity as the rate of assimilation of food energy by the
consumers - recognise both wordings.
Primary productivity depends on the plant species inhabiting a particular area. It also depends on a variety of
environmental factors, availability of nutrients and photosynthetic capacity of plants. Therefore, it varies in
different types of ecosystems.
Annual net primary productivity Value (dry weight of organic matter)
Whole biosphere Approximately 170 billion tons
Oceans (despite occupying about 70 per cent of the surface) Only 55 billion tons
Land The rest, of course, is on land
[NOTE] NCERT activity: Discuss the main reason for the low productivity of ocean with your teacher.
=====OUTPAGE 3=====
12.3 DECOMPOSITION
You may have heard of the earthworm being referred to as the farmer's 'friend'. This is so because they help in
the breakdown of complex organic matter as well as in loosening of the soil.
Decomposition: decomposers break down complex organic matter into inorganic substances like carbon
dioxide, water and nutrients, and the process is called decomposition.
Detritus: dead plant remains such as leaves, bark, flowers and dead remains of animals, including fecal
matter, constitute detritus, which is the raw material for decomposition.
The important steps in the process of decomposition are (in NCERT's order):
Fragmentation - detritivores (e.g., earthworm) break down detritus into smaller particles.
1
Leaching - water-soluble inorganic nutrients go down into the soil horizon and get precipitated as
2
unavailable salts.
Catabolism - bacterial and fungal enzymes degrade detritus into simpler inorganic substances.
3
Humification - leads to accumulation of humus (see below).
4
Mineralisation - the humus is further degraded to release inorganic nutrients (see below).
5
[NOTE] It is important to note that all the above steps in decomposition operate simultaneously on the detritus
(Figure 12.1). Humification and mineralisation occur during decomposition in the soil.
Humification leads to accumulation of a dark coloured amorphous substance called humus that is highly
resistant to microbial action and undergoes decomposition at an extremely slow rate. Being colloidal in
nature it serves as a reservoir of nutrients.
Mineralisation: the humus is further degraded by some microbes and release of inorganic nutrients occurs
by this process.
[NOTE] Five vs three - a discrepancy to know: the body lists FIVE steps (fragmentation, leaching, catabolism,
humification and mineralisation), but the Summary says decomposition involves THREE processes -
fragmentation of detritus, leaching and catabolism. Both wordings are NCERT's; do not reconcile them -
recognise either in a question.
Decomposition is largely an oxygen-requiring process. The rate of decomposition is controlled by chemical
composition of detritus and climatic factors:
Factor Effect on the rate of decomposition
Chemical composition of detritus In a particular climatic condition, decomposition is slower if detritus is rich in lignin
and chitin, and quicker if detritus is rich in nitrogen and water-soluble substances
like sugars
Climatic factors (temperature and soil The most important climatic factors; they regulate decomposition through their effects
moisture) on the activities of soil microbes. Warm and moist environment favour
decomposition, whereas low temperature and anaerobiosis inhibit decomposition,
resulting in build up of organic materials
The decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem (Figure 12.1) reads as follows: a tree grows in the soil; a
green leaf falls to the ground; some are eaten by insects and other animals, so that nutrients and energy enter
the food web; some nutrients leach into soil by chemical action; leaves partially consumed by decomposers
such as fungi and bacteria begin to lose form and become litter; there is further decomposition by
earthworms, bacteria, soil mites, fungi, etc.; and the end result is organic rich soil.
=====OUTPAGE 4=====
Fig. 12.1 - Diagrammatic representation of decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem.
12.4 ENERGY FLOW
Except for the deep sea hydro-thermal ecosystem, the sun is the only source of energy for all ecosystems on
Earth. Of the incident solar radiation, less than 50 per cent of it is photosynthetically active radiation (PAR).
Plants and photosynthetic bacteria (autotrophs) fix the Sun's radiant energy to make food from simple
inorganic materials. Plants capture only 2-10 per cent of the PAR, and this small amount of energy sustains
the entire living world.
So it is very important to know how the solar energy captured by plants flows through different organisms of an
ecosystem. All organisms are dependent for their food on producers, either directly or indirectly. So you find a
unidirectional flow of energy from the sun to producers and then to consumers.
[NOTE] Thermodynamics: Is this in keeping with the first law of thermodynamics? Ecosystems are not exempt
from the Second Law of thermodynamics either - they need a constant supply of energy to synthesise the
molecules they require, to counteract the universal tendency toward increasing disorderliness.
Producers: the green plants in the ecosystem are called producers. In a terrestrial ecosystem, major producers
are herbaceous and woody plants. In an aquatic ecosystem producers are various species like phytoplankton,
algae and higher plants.
Starting from the plants (or producers), food chains or rather webs are formed such that an animal feeds on a
plant or on another animal and in turn is food for another. The chain or web is formed because of this
interdependency.
(cid:127) No energy that is trapped into an organism remains in it for ever. The energy trapped by the producer is
either passed on to a consumer or the organism dies.
(cid:127) Death of an organism is the beginning of the detritus food chain/web.
Consumers (heterotrophs): all animals depend on plants (directly or indirectly) for their food needs, hence they
are called consumers and also heterotrophs.
=====OUTPAGE 5=====
Consumer category Definition (NCERT)
Primary consumers Animals that feed on the producers (the plants). Obviously the primary consumers will
be herbivores
Secondary consumers Animals that eat other animals which in turn eat the plants (or their produce). You
could have tertiary consumers too
Primary carnivores The consumers that feed on herbivores are carnivores, or more correctly primary
carnivores (though secondary consumers)
Secondary carnivores Those animals that depend on the primary carnivores for food
(cid:127) Some common herbivores are insects, birds and mammals in the terrestrial ecosystem and molluscs in the
aquatic ecosystem.
A simple grazing food chain (GFC) is depicted below:
Grass (Producer)
1
Goat (Primary Consumer)
2
Man (Secondary consumer)
3
Detritus food chain (DFC) begins with dead organic matter. It is made up of decomposers, which are
heterotrophic organisms, mainly fungi and bacteria. They meet their energy and nutrient requirements by
degrading dead organic matter or detritus. These are also known as saprotrophs (sapro: to decompose).
(cid:127) Decomposers secrete digestive enzymes that break down dead and waste materials into simple, inorganic
materials, which are subsequently absorbed by them.
Ecosystem Dominant energy-flow route
Aquatic ecosystem GFC is the major conduit for energy flow
Terrestrial ecosystem A much larger fraction of energy flows through the detritus food chain than through
the GFC
The detritus food chain may be connected with the grazing food chain at some levels: some of the organisms
of DFC are prey to the GFC animals, and in a natural ecosystem some animals like cockroaches, crows, etc.,
are omnivores. These natural interconnections of food chains make it a food web.
[NOTE] NCERT prompt: How would you classify human beings!
Trophic level: organisms occupy a place in the natural surroundings or in a community according to their
feeding relationship with other organisms. Based on the source of their nutrition or food, organisms occupy a
specific place in the food chain that is known as their trophic level.
Trophic levels in an ecosystem (Figure 12.2): producers belong to the first trophic level, herbivores (primary
consumer) to the second, and carnivores (secondary consumer) to the third. The important point to note is that the
amount of energy decreases at successive trophic levels.
Trophic level Category Organism type Examples
First trophic level Producer Plants Phytoplankton, grass, trees
Second trophic level Primary Consumer Herbivore Zooplankton, grasshopper and cow
Third trophic level Secondary Consumer Carnivore Birds, fishes wolf
Fourth Trophic level Tertiary Consumer Top Carnivore Man, lion
=====OUTPAGE 6=====
Fig. 12.2 - Diagrammatic representation of trophic levels in an ecosystem.
When any organism dies it is converted to detritus or dead biomass that serves as an energy source for
decomposers. Organisms at each trophic level depend on those at the lower trophic level for their energy
demands.
Standing crop: each trophic level has a certain mass of living material at a particular time called the standing
crop. It is measured as the mass of living organisms (biomass) or the number in a unit area.
(cid:127) The biomass of a species is expressed in terms of fresh or dry weight. Measurement of biomass in terms of dry
weight is more accurate. (NCERT prompt: Why?)
10 per cent law: the number of trophic levels in the grazing food chain is restricted as the transfer of energy
follows the 10 per cent law - only 10 per cent of the energy is transferred to each trophic level from the lower
trophic level.
In nature, it is possible to have so many levels - producer, herbivore, primary carnivore, secondary carnivore -
in the grazing food chain (Figure 12.3). (NCERT prompt: Do you think there is any such limitation in a detritus
food chain?)
Energy flow through different trophic levels (Figure 12.3): energy from the Sun enters the first trophic level
producers (plants), passes to the second trophic level primary consumers (herbivores), then to the third
trophic level secondary consumers (carnivores) and the fourth trophic level tertiary consumers (top
carnivores); at every step some energy is lost as Heat.
=====OUTPAGE 7=====
Fig. 12.3 - Energy flow through different trophic levels. The original colour figure separates the trophic levels by hue; after
monochrome conversion they are read by their position, labels and the Sun/Heat markers.
12.5 ECOLOGICAL PYRAMIDS
You must be familiar with the shape of a pyramid: the base is broad and it narrows towards the apex. One gets
a similar shape whether you express the food or energy relationship between organisms at different trophic levels.
This relationship is expressed in terms of number, biomass or energy.
The base of each pyramid represents the producers or the first trophic level, while the apex represents the
tertiary or top level consumer.
The three types of ecological pyramids that are usually studied are (a) pyramid of number; (b) pyramid of
biomass; and (c) pyramid of energy (for detail see Figure 12.4 a, b, c and d).
(cid:127) Any calculations of energy content, biomass or numbers has to include all organisms at that trophic level.
No generalisations we make will be true if we take only a few individuals at any trophic level into account.
(cid:127) A given organism may occupy more than one trophic level simultaneously. One must remember that the
trophic level represents a functional level, not a species as such.
(cid:127) For example, a sparrow is a primary consumer when it eats seeds, fruits, peas, and a secondary consumer
when it eats insects and worms. (NCERT prompt: Can you work out how many trophic levels human beings
function at in a food chain?)
In most ecosystems, all the pyramids - of number, of energy and biomass - are upright, i.e., producers are
more in number and biomass than the herbivores, and herbivores are more in number and biomass than the
carnivores. Also, energy at a lower trophic level is always more than at a higher level.
The values shown in the four pyramids of Figure 12.4 (every bar value carried verbatim; P = Producer, PC =
Primary consumer, SC = Secondary consumer, TC = Tertiary consumer):
Trophic level (a) Pyramid of numbers, (b) Pyramid of biomass, (c) Inverted (d) Pyramid of
grassland: Number of grassland: Dry weight pyramid of biomass energy
-2
individuals (kg m ) (aquatic)
P (Producer) 5,842,000 809 4 10,000 J
PC (Primary consumer) 708,000 37 21 1000 J
SC (Secondary consumer) 3,54,000 11 - 100 J
TC (Tertiary consumer) 3 1.5 - 10 J
=====OUTPAGE 8=====
[NOTE] Figure 12.4 caption facts: (a) Only three top-carnivores are supported in an ecosystem based on
production of nearly 6 millions plants - the bar itself reads 5,842,000 (carry both, do not reconcile). (d) An ideal
pyramid of energy: primary producers convert only 1% of the energy in the sunlight available to them into NPP,
out of 1,000,000 J of Sunlight.
Fig. 12.4 (a) - Pyramid of numbers in a grassland ecosystem. Only three top-carnivores are supported in an ecosystem based on
production of nearly 6 millions plants.
Fig. 12.4 (b) - Pyramid of biomass shows a sharp decrease in biomass at higher trophic levels.
Fig. 12.4 (c) - Inverted pyramid of biomass - small standing crop of phytoplankton supports large standing crop of zooplankton.
Fig. 12.4 (d) - An ideal pyramid of energy. Observe that primary producers convert only 1% of the energy in the sunlight available
to them into NPP.
There are exceptions to the "pyramids are upright" generalisation:
=====OUTPAGE 9=====
(cid:127) Pyramid of numbers on a big tree: if you count the number of insects feeding on a big tree, then add the
small birds depending on the insects and the larger birds eating the smaller, the pyramid of numbers you get
is not upright (it is inverted/spindle-shaped). (NCERT asks you to draw it.)
(cid:127) Pyramid of biomass in the sea is generally inverted because the biomass of fishes far exceeds that of
phytoplankton. (NCERT prompt: Isn't that a paradox? How would you explain this?)
Pyramid of energy is always upright, can never be inverted, because when energy flows from a particular
trophic level to the next, some energy is always lost as heat at each step.
(cid:127) Each bar in the energy pyramid indicates the amount of energy present at each trophic level in a given time
or annually per unit area.
[NOTE] Limitations of ecological pyramids: (1) it does not take into account the same species belonging to two or
more trophic levels; (2) it assumes a simple food chain, something that almost never exists in nature, and does not
accommodate a food web; (3) saprophytes are not given any place in ecological pyramids even though they play a
vital role in the ecosystem.
12.6 NUTRIENT CYCLING AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
[NOTE] This section carries facts stated only in the NCERT Summary - nutrient cycling is listed as one of the four
functions in 12.1 but is never defined in the body, so it is folded in here.
Nutrient cycling: the storage and movement of nutrient elements through the various components of the
ecosystem is called nutrient cycling; nutrients are repeatedly used through this process.
Type of nutrient cycle Reservoir (Summary)
Gaseous type (e.g., carbon) Atmosphere or hydrosphere
Sedimentary type (e.g., phosphorus) Earth's crust
Ecosystem services: the products of ecosystem processes are named ecosystem services - e.g., purification of
air and water by forests.
Recap QUICK RECAP
(cid:127) An ecosystem is a structural and functional unit of nature comprising abiotic components (inorganic
materials - air, water, soil) and biotic components (producers, consumers, decomposers). Each ecosystem has
a characteristic physical structure from the interaction of these components.
(cid:127) Species composition and stratification are the two main structural features of an ecosystem. Based on the
source of nutrition, every organism occupies a place in an ecosystem.
(cid:127) Productivity, decomposition, energy flow and nutrient cycling are the four important
functions/components of an ecosystem.
(cid:127) Primary productivity is the rate of capture of solar energy or biomass production of the producers. GPP is
the total production of organic matter; NPP is the remaining biomass/energy left after utilisation by
producers (GPP - R). Secondary productivity is the rate of assimilation of food energy by the consumers.
(cid:127) In decomposition, complex organic compounds of detritus are converted to carbon dioxide, water and
inorganic nutrients by the decomposers. The body lists five steps; the Summary names three - fragmentation,
leaching and catabolism.
(cid:127) Energy flow is unidirectional: first, plants capture solar energy, and then food is transferred from the
producers to decomposers. Organisms of different trophic levels are connected for food/energy, forming a
food chain and food web.
(cid:127) Nutrient cycling is the storage and movement of nutrients through the ecosystem; it is of two types - gaseous
(reservoir: atmosphere/hydrosphere, e.g. carbon) and sedimentary (reservoir: Earth's crust, e.g. phosphorus).
Ecosystem services are the products of ecosystem processes, e.g. purification of air and water by forests.
Appendix TERMS USED IN THE EXERCISES
NCERT's eleven exercise questions assume a few terms/facts the chapter never states outright. Everything below is
built only from statements already made in this chapter (plus the Summary).
=====OUTPAGE 10=====
Term / fact assumed Explanation (from this chapter)
Litter (Ex 6(e): distinguish litter and The body never defines litter; it appears only in Figure 12.1. Litter = freshly fallen,
detritus) still-recognisable dead plant/animal material on the soil surface, which - as decomposers
begin to consume it - loses form and becomes part of the detritus (all dead plant/animal
remains that are the raw material for decomposition)
Limiting factor for productivity in The body only asks you to discuss low ocean productivity. The limiting factor is light
aquatic ecosystems (Ex 1(c)) (and nutrient) availability in water, tied to the ocean's low 55-billion-ton productivity
despite its large area
Major reservoir of carbon on earth From the nutrient-cycling block: carbon follows a gaseous cycle whose reservoir is the
(Ex 1(e)) atmosphere or hydrosphere
Secondary producers (Ex 4) The term appears nowhere in the chapter; NCERT uses secondary productivity and
primary/secondary consumers. As there is no such category, the intended answer is (d)
None of the above
Pyramid of numbers in a Posed as an activity in NCERT. The pyramid is inverted / spindle-shaped, the same
tree-dominated ecosystem (Ex 1(b)) non-upright case as the big-tree/insects/birds example
Appendix NCERT Exercises (for reference)
1. Fill in the blanks: (a) Plants are called autotrophs/producers because they fix carbon dioxide; (b) in an
ecosystem dominated by trees, the pyramid of numbers is inverted/spindle type; (c) in aquatic ecosystems, the
limiting factor for productivity is light; (d) common detritivores are earthworms; (e) the major reservoir of carbon
on earth is oceans/hydrosphere.
2-5 (MCQ): 2. Largest population in a food chain - (a) Producers. 3. The second trophic level in a lake - (b)
Zooplankton. 4. Secondary producers are - (d) None of the above. 5. Percentage of PAR in incident solar
radiation - (b) 50% (NCERT states "less than 50 per cent").
6. Distinguish between: (a) Grazing food chain and detritus food chain; (b) Production and decomposition; (c)
Upright and inverted pyramid; (d) Food chain and Food web; (e) Litter and detritus; (f) Primary and secondary
productivity - all covered above.
7-11 (long answers): 7. Describe the components of an ecosystem. 8. Define ecological pyramids and describe,
with examples, pyramids of number and biomass. 9. What is primary productivity? Describe factors that affect it.
10. Define decomposition and describe its processes and products. 11. Give an account of energy flow in an
ecosystem - all answered by the sections above.
Every fact, number, name, qualifier, table row, figure and figure label in NCERT Class 12 Chapter 12 is carried above. Nothing
outside the source chapter has been added.