150 BIOLOGY
incident light beyond a point causes the breakdown of chlorophyll and a
decrease in photosynthesis.
11.10.2 Carbon dioxide Concentration
Carbon dioxide is the major limiting factor for photosynthesis. The
concentration of CO is very low in the atmosphere (between 0.03 and
2
0.04 per cent). Increase in concentration upto 0.05 per cent can cause an
increase in CO fixation rates; beyond this the levels can become damaging
2
over longer periods.
The C and C plants respond differently to CO concentrations. At
3 4 2
low light conditions neither group responds to high CO conditions. At
2
high light intensities, both C and C plants show increase in the rates of
3 4
photosynthesis. What is important to note is that the C plants show
4
saturation at about 360 µlL-1 while C responds to increased CO
3 2
concentration and saturation is seen only beyond 450 µlL-1. Thus, current
availability of CO levels is limiting to the C plants.
2 3
The fact that C plants respond to higher CO concentration by
3 2
showing increased rates of photosynthesis leading to higher productivity
has been used for some greenhouse crops such as tomatoes and bell
pepper. They are allowed to grow in carbon dioxide enriched atmosphere
that leads to higher yields.
11.10.3 Temperature
The dark reactions being enzymatic are temperature controlled. Though
the light reactions are also temperature sensitive they are affected to a
much lesser extent. The C plants respond to higher temperatures and
4
show higher rate of photosynthesis while C plants have a much lower
3
temperature optimum.
The temperature optimum for photosynthesis of different plants also
depends on the habitat that they are adapted to. Tropical plants have a
higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate
climates.
11.10.4 Water
Even though water is one of the reactants in the light reaction, the effect of
water as a factor is more through its effect on the plant, rather than directly
on photosynthesis. Water stress causes the stomata to close hence reducing
the CO availability. Besides, water stress also makes leaves wilt, thus,
2
reducing the surface area of the leaves and their metabolic activity as well.
Reprint 2026-27
PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS 151
S
UMMARY
Green plants make their own food by photosynthesis. During this process carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere is taken in by leaves through stomata and used for
making carbohydrates, principally glucose and starch. Photosynthesis takes place
only in the green parts of the plants, mainly the leaves. Within the leaves, the
mesophyll cells have a large number of chloroplasts that are responsible for CO
2
fixation. Within the chloroplasts, the membranes are sites for the light reaction,
while the chemosynthetic pathway occurs in the stroma. Photosynthesis has two
stages: the light reaction and the carbon fixing reactions. In the light reaction the
light energy is absorbed by the pigments present in the antenna, and funnelled to
special chlorophyll a molecules called reaction centre chlorophylls. There are two
photosystems, PS I and PS II. PS I has a 700 nm absorbing chlorophyll a P700
molecule at its reaction centre, while PS II has a P680 reaction centre that absorbs
red light at 680 nm. After absorbing light, electrons are excited and transferred
through PS II and PS I and finally to NAD forming NADH. During this process a
proton gradient is created across the membrane of the thylakoid. The breakdown
of the protons gradient due to movement through the F part of the ATPase enzyme
0
releases enough energy for synthesis of ATP. Splitting of water molecules is
associated with PS II resulting in the release of O , protons and transfer of electrons
2
to PS II.
In the carbon fixation cycle, CO is added by the enzyme, RuBisCO, to a 5-
2
carbon compound RuBP that is converted to 2 molecules of 3-carbon PGA. This
is then converted to sugar by the Calvin cycle, and the RuBP is regenerated. During
this process ATP and NADPH synthesised in the light reaction are utilised. RuBisCO
also catalyses a wasteful oxygenation reaction in C plants: photorespiration.
3
Some tropical plants show a special type of photosynthesis called C pathway.
4
In these plants the first product of CO fixation that takes place in the mesophyll,
2
is a 4-carbon compound. In the bundle sheath cells the Calvin pathway is carried
out for the synthesis of carbohydrates.
E
XERCISES
1. By looking at a plant externally, can you tell whether a plant is C or C ? Why
3 4
and how?
2. By looking at which internal structure of a plant you can tell whether a plant is
C or C ? Explain.
3 4
3. Even though a very few cells in a C plant carry out the biosynthetic – Calvin
4
pathway, yet they are highly productive. Can you discuss why?
Reprint 2026-27
152 BIOLOGY
4. RuBisCO is an enzyme that acts both as a carboxylase and oxygenase. Why do
you think RuBisCO carries out more carboxylation in C plants?
4
5. Suppose there were plants that had a high concentration of Chlorophyll b, but
lacked chlorophyll a, would it carry out photosynthesis? Then why do plants
have chlorophyll b and other accessory pigments?
6. Why is the colour of a leaf kept in the dark frequently becomes yellow, or pale
green? Which pigment do you think is more stable?
7. Look at leaves of the same plant on the shady side and compare it with the
leaves on the sunny side. Or, compare the potted plants kept in the sunlight with
those in the shade. Which of them has leaves that are darker green ? Why?
8. Figure 11.10 shows the effect of light on the rate of photosynthesis. Based on the
graph, answer the following questions:
(a) At which point/s (A, B or C) in the curve light is a limiting factor?
(b) What could be the limiting factor/s in region A?
(c) What do C and D represent on the curve?
9. Give comparison between the following:
(a) C and C pathways
3 4
(b) Cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
(c) Anatomy of leaf in C and C plants
3 4
Reprint 2026-27