3
After ovulation, the ruptured follicle is converted to a structure called corpus luteum.
4
The corpus luteum secretes mainly progesterone.
Hormone
Actions
Estrogens
Produce wide ranging actions such as stimulation of growth and activities of female secondary
sex organs, development of growing ovarian follicles, appearance of female secondary sex
characters (e.g., high pitch of voice, etc.) and mammary gland development. Estrogens also
regulate female sexual behaviour
Progesterone - the exercises
call it the Progestational
hormone
Progesterone supports pregnancy. It also acts on the mammary glands and stimulates the
formation of alveoli (sac-like structures which store milk) and milk secretion. Progesterone thus
plays a major role in the maintenance of pregnancy as well as in mammary gland development
and lactation
19.3
HORMONES OF HEART, KIDNEY AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Now you know about the endocrine glands and their hormones. However, as mentioned earlier, hormones are
also secreted by some tissues which are not endocrine glands.
Non-gland source
Hormone
Action
Heart - the atrial wall
Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), a
very important peptide hormone
Decreases blood pressure
Kidney - the juxtaglomerular
cells
Erythropoietin, a peptide hormone
Stimulates erythropoiesis (formation of RBC)
1
Blood pressure is increased.
2
ANF is secreted.
3
This causes dilation of the blood vessels.
4
This reduces the blood pressure.
Endocrine cells present in different parts of the gastro-intestinal tract secrete four major peptide
hormones, namely gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin (CCK) and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP).
GI hormone
Acts on
Action
Gastrin
The gastric glands
Stimulates the secretion of hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen
Secretin
The exocrine pancreas
Stimulates secretion of water and bicarbonate ions
CCK
Both pancreas and gall
bladder
Stimulates the secretion of pancreatic enzymes and bile juice,
respectively
GIP
The stomach
Inhibits gastric secretion and motility
[NOTE] Taken together, these hormones regulate the secretion of digestive juices and help in digestion - three
stimulate a secretion and the fourth, GIP, shuts one down.
Several other non-endocrine tissues secrete hormones called growth factors. These factors are essential for
the normal growth of tissues and their repairing/regeneration.
[MEMORY AID - not in NCERT] Four GI hormones, three organs, one inhibitor: Gastrin -> stomach acid,
Secretin -> pancreatic bicarbonate, CCK -> pancreatic enzymes + bile, GIP -> the only one that inhibits. "GIP is
the Grumpy Inhibitory Peptide."
19.4
MECHANISM OF HORMONE ACTION
Hormones produce their effects on target tissues by binding to specific proteins called hormone receptors
located in the target tissues only.
