Disorder
Cause
Consequences
Hyperthyroidism
Cancer of the thyroid gland or
development of nodules of the
thyroid glands
Rate of synthesis and secretion of the thyroid hormones is
increased to abnormal high levels, which adversely affects the
body physiology
Exopthalmic goitre (the
source's own spelling),
also called Graves'
disease
A form of hyperthyroidism
Enlargement of the thyroid gland, protrusion of the eyeballs,
increased basal metabolic rate and weight loss
What the thyroid hormones do
• Thyroid hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal metabolic rate.
• These hormones also support the process of red blood cell formation.
• Thyroid hormones control the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats.
• Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is also influenced by thyroid hormones.
• Collected in one line: the thyroid gland hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal metabolic
rate, development and maturation of the central neural system, erythropoiesis, metabolism of
carbohydrates, proteins and fats, menstrual cycle.
Thyroid gland also secretes a protein hormone called thyrocalcitonin (TCT) which regulates the blood
calcium levels - thyrocalcitonin regulates calcium levels in our blood by decreasing it.
19.2.5
Parathyroid Gland
In humans, four parathyroid glands are present on the back side of the thyroid gland, one pair each in the two
lobes of the thyroid gland (Figure 19.3 b).
The parathyroid glands secrete a peptide hormone called parathyroid hormone (PTH). The secretion of PTH
is regulated by the circulating levels of calcium ions.
1
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases the Ca2+ levels in the blood.
2
PTH acts on bones and stimulates the process of bone resorption (dissolution/demineralisation).
3
PTH also stimulates reabsorption of Ca2+ by the renal tubules.
4
PTH increases Ca2+ absorption from the digested food.
It is, thus, clear that PTH is a hypercalcemic hormone, i.e., it increases the blood Ca2+ levels. Along with
TCT, it plays a significant role in calcium balance in the body.
[MEMORY AID - not in NCERT] Calcium see-saw: PTH pushes calcium UP (hypercalcemic: bone, kidney, gut
all deliver calcium to the blood); TCT pulls it DOWN. Same ion, opposite glands - thyroid down, parathyroid up.
19.2.6
Thymus
The thymus gland is a lobular structure located between lungs behind sternum on the ventral side of aorta.
The thymus plays a major role in the development of the immune system.
This gland secretes the peptide hormones called thymosins.
• Thymosins play a major role in the differentiation of T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated
immunity.
• In addition, thymosins also promote production of antibodies to provide humoral immunity.
• Thymus is degenerated in old individuals resulting in a decreased production of thymosins. As a result, the
immune responses of old persons become weak.
19.2.7
Adrenal Gland
Our body has one pair of adrenal glands, one above of each kidney (Figure 19.4 a). The gland is composed of
two types of tissues: the centrally located tissue is called the adrenal medulla, and outside this lies the adrenal
cortex (Figure 19.4 b).
