3
In addition, this hormone stimulates the process of gluconeogenesis, which also contributes to
hyperglycemia.
4
Glucagon reduces the cellular glucose uptake and utilisation.
5
Thus, glucagon is a hyperglycemic hormone.
Insulin - the hypoglycemic hormone
1
Insulin acts mainly on hepatocytes and adipocytes (cells of adipose tissue).
2
It enhances cellular glucose uptake and utilisation.
3
As a result, there is a rapid movement of glucose from blood to hepatocytes and adipocytes, resulting in
decreased blood glucose levels (hypoglycemia).
4
Insulin also stimulates conversion of glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) in the target cells.
The glucose homeostasis in blood is thus maintained jointly by the two - insulin and glucagons (the source's
own plural spelling of glucagon).
[NOTE] Prolonged hyperglycemia leads to a complex disorder called diabetes mellitus, which is associated with
loss of glucose through urine and formation of harmful compounds known as ketone bodies. Insulin deficiency
and/or insulin resistance result in this disease, and diabetic patients are successfully treated with insulin therapy.
[MEMORY AID - not in NCERT] Alphabet trick: Alpha comes first and gives glucAgon, which raises sugar; Beta
gives insulin, which Brings sugar down. Hyper- and hypo-glycemia are therefore alpha and beta respectively.
19.2.9
Testis
A pair of testis is present in the scrotal sac (outside abdomen) of male individuals (Figure 19.1). Testis
performs dual functions as a primary sex organ as well as an endocrine gland.
Testis is composed of seminiferous tubules and stromal or interstitial tissue. The Leydig cells or interstitial
cells, which are present in the intertubular spaces, produce a group of hormones called androgens, mainly
testosterone.
• Androgens regulate the development, maturation and functions of the male accessory sex organs like
epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra etc.
• These hormones stimulate muscular growth, growth of facial and axillary hair, aggressiveness, low pitch of
voice etc.
• Androgens play a major stimulatory role in the process of spermatogenesis (formation of spermatozoa).
• Androgens act on the central neural system and influence the male sexual behaviour (libido).
• These hormones produce anabolic (synthetic) effects on protein and carbohydrate metabolism.
• Collected in one line: the testis secretes androgens, which stimulate the development, maturation and
functions of the male accessory sex organs, appearance of the male secondary sex characters,
spermatogenesis, male sexual behaviour, anabolic pathways and erythropoiesis.
19.2.10
Ovary
Females have a pair of ovaries located in the abdomen (Figure 19.1). Ovary is the primary female sex organ
which produces one ovum during each menstrual cycle. In addition, ovary also produces two groups of steroid
hormones called estrogen and progesterone.
Ovary is composed of ovarian follicles and stromal tissues. The estrogen is synthesised and secreted mainly
by the growing ovarian follicles.
(cycle - last step feeds back to step 1)
1
A follicle grows and secretes estrogen.
2
Ovulation occurs.
