Hormone
Action
FSH in males
FSH and androgens regulate spermatogenesis
LH in females
Induces ovulation of fully mature follicles (graafian follicles) and maintains the corpus
luteum, formed from the remnants of the graafian follicles after ovulation
FSH in females
Stimulates growth and development of the ovarian follicles
MSH - the exercises call it
Melanotrophin (MSH)
Acts on the melanocytes (melanin containing cells) and regulates pigmentation of the skin
The two posterior-pituitary hormones
Hormone
Action
Oxytocin
Acts on the smooth muscles of our body and stimulates their contraction. In females it stimulates a
vigorous contraction of uterus at the time of child birth, and milk ejection from the mammary
gland
Vasopressin
Acts mainly at the kidney and stimulates resorption of water and electrolytes by the distal tubules,
thereby reducing loss of water through urine (diuresis); hence it is also called anti-diuretic hormone
(ADH)
[NOTE] An impairment affecting synthesis or release of ADH results in a diminished ability of the kidney to
conserve water, leading to water loss and dehydration. This condition is known as Diabetes Insipidus - a water
disorder, not a sugar disorder.
Taken together, the pituitary hormones regulate the growth and development of somatic tissues and the
activities of peripheral endocrine glands.
[MEMORY AID - not in NCERT] Six from pars distalis: GH, PRL, TSH, ACTH, LH, FSH - "Good People Take
All Life's Favours". One from pars intermedia: MSH. Two stored in pars nervosa: oxytocin, vasopressin. 6 + 1 +
2.
19.2.3
The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland is located on the dorsal side of forebrain. Pineal secretes a hormone called melatonin.
• Melatonin plays a very important role in the regulation of a 24-hour (diurnal) rhythm of our body.
- For example, it helps in maintaining the normal rhythms of sleep-wake cycle, body temperature.
• In addition, melatonin also influences metabolism, pigmentation, the menstrual cycle as well as our defense
capability.
19.2.4
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is composed of two lobes which are located on either side of the trachea (Figure 19.3 a). Both
the lobes are interconnected with a thin flap of connective tissue called isthmus.
The thyroid gland is composed of follicles and stromal tissues. Each thyroid follicle is composed of follicular
cells, enclosing a cavity.
These follicular cells synthesise two hormones, tetraiodothyronine or thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine
(T3). Iodine is essential for the normal rate of hormone synthesis in the thyroid.
