241
241
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
19.2.2
The Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland is located in a bony cavity
called sella tursica and is attached to
hypothalamus by a stalk (Figure 19.2). It is
divided anatomically into an adenohypophysis
and a neurohypophysis. Adenohypophysis
consists of two portions, pars distalis and pars
intermedia. The pars distalis region of pituitary,
commonly called anterior pituitary, produces
growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid
stimulating 
hormone 
(TSH),
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH). Pars intermedia
secretes only one hormone called melanocyte
stimulating hormone (MSH). However, in
humans, the pars intermedia is almost merged
with pars distalis. Neurohypophysis (pars
nervosa) also known as posterior pituitary, stores
and releases two hormones called oxytocin and
vasopressin, which are actually synthesised by
the hypothalamus and are transported axonally to neurohypophysis.
Over-secretion of GH stimulates abnormal growth of the body leading
to gigantism and low secretion of GH results in stunted growth resulting
in pituitary dwarfism. Excess secretion of growth hormone in adults
especially in middle age can result in severe disfigurement (especially of
the face) called Acromegaly, which may lead to serious complications,
and premature death if unchecked. The disease is hard to diagnose in
the early stages and often goes undetected for many years, until changes
in external features become noticeable. Prolactin regulates the growth of
the mammary glands and formation of milk in them. TSH stimulates the
synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones from the thyroid gland. ACTH
stimulates the synthesis and secretion of steroid hormones called
glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex. LH and FSH stimulate gonadal
activity and hence are called gonadotrophins. In males, LH stimulates
the synthesis and secretion of hormones called androgens from testis.
In males, FSH and androgens regulate spermatogenesis. In females, LH
induces ovulation of fully mature follicles (graafian follicles) and maintains
the corpus luteum, formed from the remnants of the graafian follicles
after ovulation. FSH stimulates growth and development of the ovarian
Posterior
pituitary
Anterior
pituitary
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic
neurons
Portal circulation
Figure 19.2 Diagrammatic representation of
pituitary and its relationship with
hypothalamus
Reprint 2026-27
