BIOLOGY
242
follicles in females. MSH acts on the melanocytes
(melanin containing cells) and regulates pigmentation
of the skin. Oxytocin acts on the smooth muscles of
our body and stimulates their contraction. In females,
it stimulates a vigorous contraction of uterus at the
time of child birth, and milk ejection from the mammary
gland. Vasopressin acts mainly at the kidney and
stimulates resorption of water and electrolytes by the
distal tubules and thereby reduces loss of water
through urine (diuresis). Hence, it is also called as anti-
diuretic hormone (ADH).
An impairment affecting synthesis or release of ADH
results in a diminished ability of the kidney to conserve
water leading to water loss and dehydration. This
condition is known as Diabetes Insipidus.
19.2.3
The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland is located on the dorsal side of
forebrain. Pineal secretes a hormone called melatonin.
Melatonin plays a very important role in the regulation
of a 24-hour (diurnal) rhythm of our body. For
example, it helps in maintaining the normal rhythms
of sleep-wake cycle, body temperature. In addition,
melatonin also influences metabolism, pigmentation,
the menstrual cycle as well as our defense capability.
19.2.4
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is composed of two lobes which are
located on either side of the trachea (Figure 19.3 a). Both
the lobes are interconnected with a thin flap of connective
tissue called isthmus. The thyroid gland is composed of
follicles and stromal tissues. Each thyroid follicle is
composed of follicular cells, enclosing a cavity. These
follicular 
cells 
synthesise 
two 
hormones,
tetraiodothyronine or thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3). Iodine is essential for the normal
rate of hormone synthesis in the thyroid. Deficiency of
iodine in our diet results in hypothyroidism and
enlargement of the thyroid gland, commonly called
goitre. Hypothyroidism during pregnancy causes
defective development and maturation of the growing
baby leading to stunted growth (cretinism), mental
Figure 19.3 Diagrammatic view of the
position of Thyroid and
Parathyroid
(a) Ventral side
(b) Dorsal side
Reprint 2026-27
