Category
Principle / How it works
Key examples and notes
Natural /
Traditional
Avoid chances of ovum and sperms
meeting; no medicines or devices; side
effects almost nil but chances of failure
are also high
Periodic abstinence: avoid coitus day 10 to 17 when ovulation
could be expected -- the fertile period. Withdrawal / coitus
interruptus: male withdraws penis before ejaculation to avoid
insemination. Lactational amenorrhea (absence of
menstruation): ovulation does not occur during intense lactation
after parturition; as long as mother breast-feeds fully, chances of
conception are almost nil, but effective only upto six months
after parturition
Barrier
Ovum and sperms prevented from
physically meeting with barriers;
available for both males and females
Condoms (Fig. 3.1a, b): thin rubber/latex sheath covering
penis or vagina and cervix so ejaculated semen does not enter
female tract; Nirodh is a popular male brand; protects also
from STIs and AIDS; disposable, self-inserted, gives privacy.
Diaphragms, cervical caps and vaults: rubber barriers
covering cervix, blocking entry of sperms through cervix,
reusable. Spermicidal creams, jellies and foams usually used
alongwith barriers increase efficiency
IUDs
Inserted by doctors or expert nurses in
uterus through vagina; increase
phagocytosis of sperms and Cu ions
suppress sperm motility and
fertilising capacity; hormone-releasing
IUDs also make uterus unsuitable for
implantation and cervix hostile to
sperms; ideal for spacing and
delaying; most widely accepted in
India
Non-medicated: Lippes loop; Copper-releasing: CuT, Cu7,
Multiload 375; Hormone-releasing: Progestasert, LNG-20 (Fig.
3.2)
Oral contraceptives
(pills)
Inhibit ovulation and implantation
and alter quality of cervical mucus to
prevent / retard entry of sperms; very
effective with lesser side effects, well
accepted
Progestogens or progestogen-estrogen combinations as
tablets (pills): taken daily for 21 days starting preferably
within first five days of menstrual cycle; after a gap of 7 days
(menstruation occurs) repeat same pattern till desire to prevent
conception. Saheli: non-steroidal, once a week pill with very
few side effects and high contraceptive value
Injectables /
Implants
Mode similar to pills; effective periods
much longer
Progestogens alone or in combination with estrogen as
injections or implants under the skin (Fig. 3.3)
Emergency
contraception
Within 72 hours of coitus, very
effective after rape or casual unprotected
intercourse
Progestogens or progestogen-estrogen combinations or IUDs
within 72 hours
Surgical
(sterilisation)
Blocks gamete transport and prevents
conception; highly effective but
reversibility very poor; generally
advised as terminal method to prevent
any more pregnancies
Male - vasectomy and female - tubectomy. Vasectomy: small
part of vas deferens is removed or tied up through small
incision on scrotum (Fig. 3.4a) -- Vas deferens tied and cut.
Tubectomy: small part of fallopian tube is removed (Fig.
3.4b) or tied up through incision in abdomen or through
vagina -- Fallopian tubes tied and cut
3.2
Natural and traditional methods
Principle: avoid chances of ovum and sperms meeting -- no medicines or devices involved.
Method
How it is practised
Key timing / limit
Periodic abstinence
Couples avoid coitus day 10 to 17 of menstrual cycle
when ovulation could be expected -- the fertile period
(very high chance of fertilisation)
Fertile window 10-17
Withdrawal / coitus interruptus
Male withdraws penis just before ejaculation so as to
avoid insemination
--
Lactational amenorrhea
(absence of menstruation)
Based on ovulation not occurring during intense
lactation after parturition; as long as mother
breast-feeds fully, chances almost nil
Effective only upto 6 months
following parturition
