Trade-off: no medicines or devices so side effects almost nil, but chances of failure are also high.
3.2
Barrier methods
Principle: ovum and sperms prevented from physically meeting with help of barriers -- available for both
males and females.
Barrier
What it is / how used
Extra facts
Condoms (Fig. 3.1a, b) -- thin
rubber/latex sheath
Cover penis in male or vagina and cervix in
female just before coitus so ejaculated semen
does not enter female tract
Nirodh popular male brand; protects
from STIs and AIDS -- use increased
in recent years; disposable,
self-inserted, gives privacy
Diaphragms, cervical caps and
vaults -- rubber, cover cervix
Inserted into female tract to cover cervix during
coitus; blocks entry of sperms through cervix
Reusable
Spermicidal creams, jellies and
foams
Usually used alongwith barriers
Increase contraceptive efficiency
3.2
Intra-uterine devices (IUDs)
Inserted by doctors or expert nurses in uterus through vagina -- one of the most widely accepted methods in
India, ideal for delaying and spacing.
IUD type
Examples (Fig. 3.2)
How it works
Non-medicated
Lippes loop
Increase phagocytosis of sperms within uterus
Copper-releasing
CuT, Cu7, Multiload 375
Cu ions suppress sperm motility and fertilising capacity
Hormone-releasing
Progestasert, LNG-20
Make uterus unsuitable for implantation and cervix hostile
to sperms (in addition to phagocytosis)
3.2
Oral contraceptives, injectables, implants and emergency contraception
Method
Composition / delivery
Schedule and action
Oral pills -- progestogens or
progestogen-estrogen
combinations as tablets
Popularly called pills; Saheli --
non-steroidal, once a week, very few
side effects, high contraceptive value
Take daily for 21 days starting preferably within first
5 days of menstrual cycle; gap 7 days (menstruation)
then repeat; inhibit ovulation and implantation and
alter cervical mucus to prevent/retard sperm entry;
very effective, lesser side effects, well accepted
Injectables / Implants --
progestogens alone or with
estrogen
As injections or implants under the
skin (Fig. 3.3)
Mode similar to pills but effective periods much
longer
Emergency contraception
Progestogens or
progestogen-estrogen combinations
or IUDs
Within 72 hours of coitus -- very effective after rape or
casual unprotected intercourse
3.2
Surgical methods -- sterilisation
Surgical methods, also called sterilisation, are generally advised for the male/female partner as a terminal
method to prevent any more pregnancies. Surgical intervention blocks gamete transport and thereby
prevent conception. Sterilisation procedure in the male is called vasectomy and that in the female,
tubectomy.
1
Vasectomy: a small part of the vas deferens is removed or tied up through a small incision on the
scrotum (Figure 3.4a) -- Vas deferens tied and cut.
2
Tubectomy: a small part of the fallopian tube is removed (Figure 3.4b) or tied up through a small
incision in the abdomen or through vagina -- Fallopian tubes tied and cut.
These techniques are highly effective but their reversibility is very poor.
