Genes which code for a pair of contrasting traits are known as alleles, i.e., they are slightly different forms
of the same gene.
Writing a cross in symbols:
• If we use alphabetical symbols for each gene, then the capital letter is used for the trait expressed at the F1
stage and the small alphabet for the other trait.
• For example, in case of the character of height, T is used for the Tall trait and t for the 'dwarf', and T and t
are alleles of each other.
• Hence, in plants the pair of alleles for height would be TT, Tt or tt.
Term
What it means
How the height alleles map to it
Genotype
The pair of alleles a plant actually carries.
TT (tall parent), Tt (F1), tt (dwarf parent)
Phenotype
What the plant looks like.
Tall and dwarf
Homozygous
Both alleles in the pair are the same.
True-breeding parents are TT and tt
Heterozygous
The two alleles in the pair are different.
The F1 is Tt
Dominant vs recessive
In a pair of dissimilar alleles, one is expressed
in the phenotype and the other is hidden.
T is dominant over t, so Tt is phenotypically tall
• Mendel also proposed that in a true breeding, tall or dwarf pea variety the allelic pair of genes for height
are identical or homozygous, TT and tt, respectively.
• TT and tt are called the genotype of the plant while the descriptive terms tall and dwarf are the
phenotype.
• What then would be the phenotype of a plant that had a genotype Tt?
• As Mendel found the phenotype of the F1 heterozygote Tt to be exactly like the TT parent in appearance,
he proposed that in a pair of dissimilar factors, one dominates the other (as in the F1) and hence is called
the dominant factor while the other factor is recessive.
• In this case T (for tallness) is dominant over t (for dwarfness), that is recessive.
• (Do not use T for tall and d for dwarf because you will find it difficult to remember whether T and d are
alleles of the same gene/character or not).
• Alleles can be similar as in the case of homozygotes TT and tt or can be dissimilar as in the case of the
heterozygote Tt.
Since the Tt plant is heterozygous for genes controlling one character (height), it is a monohybrid and the
cross between TT and tt is a monohybrid cross.
From the F1 and F2 outcomes, Mendel inferred the segregation mechanism:
• From the observation that the recessive parental trait is expressed without any blending in the F2
generation, we can infer that, when the tall and dwarf plant produce gametes, by the process of meiosis,
the alleles of the parental pair separate or segregate from each other and only one allele is transmitted to
a gamete.
• This segregation of alleles is a random process and so there is a 50 per cent chance of a gamete containing
either allele, as has been verified by the results of the crossings.
• In this way the gametes of the tall TT plants have the allele T and the gametes of the dwarf tt plants have
the allele t.
• During fertilisation the two alleles, T from one parent say, through the pollen, and t from the other parent,
then through the egg, are united to produce zygotes that have one T allele and one t allele.
4.2a
Punnett Square - the cross on paper
• The production of gametes by the parents, the formation of the zygotes, the F1 and F2 plants can be
understood from a diagram called Punnett Square as shown in Figure 4.4.
• It was developed by a British geneticist, Reginald C. Punnett.
It is a graphical representation to calculate the probability of all possible genotypes of offspring in a
genetic cross.
