affected, the less alpha globin molecules produced.
• While beta Thalassemia is controlled by a single gene HBB on chromosome 11 of each parent and occurs
due to mutation of one or both the genes.
• Thalassemia differs from sickle-cell anaemia in that the former is a quantitative problem of synthesising
too few globin molecules while the latter is a qualitative problem of synthesising an incorrectly
functioning globin.
4.8.3
Chromosomal Disorders
• The chromosomal disorders on the other hand are caused due to absence or excess or abnormal
arrangement of one or more chromosomes.
Failure of segregation of chromatids during cell division cycle results in the gain or loss of a
chromosome(s), called aneuploidy.
• For example Down's syndrome results in the gain of extra copy of chromosome 21.
• Similarly, Turner's syndrome results due to loss of an X chromosome in human females.
Failure of cytokinesis after telophase stage of cell division results in an increase in a whole set of
chromosomes in an organism and, this phenomenon is known as polyploidy. This condition is often seen in
plants.
• The total number of chromosomes in a normal human cell is 46 (23 pairs). Out of these 22 pairs are
autosomes and one pair of chromosomes are sex chromosome.
These situations are known as trisomy or monosomy of a chromosome, respectively. Such a situation leads
to very serious consequences in the individual.
• Down's Syndrome, Turner's syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome are common examples of chromosomal
disorders.
Down's
Down's Syndrome (trisomy 21)
• Down's Syndrome: The cause of this genetic disorder is the presence of an additional copy of the chromosome
number 21 (trisomy of 21).
• This disorder was first described by Langdon Down (1866).
• The affected individual is short statured with small round head, furrowed tongue and partially open
mouth (Figure 4.16). Palm is broad with characteristic palm crease. Physical, psychomotor and mental
development is retarded.
[NOTE] Read the plate (Figure 4.16 labels). The plate is A representative figure showing an individual inflicted
with Down's syndrome and the corresponding chromosomes of the individual. The label row of the plate is empty
in the source, and the only fact-bearing labels NCERT prints on the plate are the six physical signs called out as:
Broad flat face, Flat back of head, Many 'loops' on finger tips, Palm crease, Big and wrinkled tongue, and
Congenital heart disease.
Klinefelter's
Klinefelter's Syndrome (47, XXY)
• Klinefelter's Syndrome: This genetic disorder is also caused due to the presence of an additional copy of X
chromosome resulting into a karyotype of 47, XXY.
• Such an individual has overall masculine development, however, the feminine development (development
of breast, i.e., Gynaecomastia) is also expressed (Figure 4.17a). Such individuals are sterile.
Turner's
Turner's Syndrome (45, X0)
• Turner's Syndrome: Such a disorder is caused due to the absence of one of the X chromosomes, i.e., 45 with
X0, Such females are sterile as ovaries are rudimentary besides other features including lack of other secondary
sexual characters (Figure 4.17b).
