• Females, however, produce only one type of ovum with an X-chromosome.
• There is an equal probability of fertilisation of the ovum with the sperm carrying either X or Y
chromosome. In case the ovum fertilises with a sperm carrying X-chromosome the zygote develops into a
female (XX) and the fertilisation of ovum with Y-chromosome carrying sperm results into a male offspring.
• Thus, it is evident that it is the genetic make up of the sperm that determines the sex of the child.
• It is also evident that in each pregnancy there is always 50 per cent probability of either a male or a female
child.
4.6.2
Sex Determination in Honey Bee
• The sex determination in honey bee is based on the number of sets of chromosomes an individual receives.
• An offspring formed from the union of a sperm and an egg develops as a female (queen or worker), and an
unfertilised egg develops as a male (drone) by means of parthenogenesis.
• This means that the males have half the number of chromosomes than that of a female. The females are
diploid having 32 chromosomes and males are haploid, i.e., having 16 chromosomes.
This is called as haplodiploid sex-determination system and has special characteristic features such as the
males produce sperms by mitosis (Figure 4.13), they do not have father and thus cannot have sons, but
have a grandfather and can have grandsons.
[NOTE] Read the plate (Figure 4.13 labels - the honey bee plate, p21). The plate is Figure 4.13 Sex determination
in honey bee (NCERT prints a SECOND Figure 4.13 on p22, the pedigree-symbol plate - they share the same
printed number). The honey bee plate's labels: Parents at the top, with the two columns labelled Female and Male;
the row below carries Gametes: (the female contributes 32, the male contributes 16); the middle row is the
meiotic/mitotic branch with Meiosis on the female side and Mitosis on the male side; the bottom row is F1: - 32 on
the female side (fertilised eggs) and 16 on the male side (unfertilised eggs). The 32 and 16 chromosome counts on
the right are the diploid and haploid numbers.
4.7
MUTATION
Mutation is a phenomenon which results in alteration of DNA sequences and consequently results in
changes in the genotype and the phenotype of an organism.
• In addition to recombination, mutation is another phenomenon that leads to variation in DNA.
• As you will learn in Chapter 5, one DNA helix runs continuously from one end to the other in each
chromatid, in a highly supercoiled form.
• Therefore loss (deletions) or gain (insertion/duplication) of a segment of DNA, result in alteration in
chromosomes. Since genes are known to be located on chromosomes, alteration in chromosomes results in
abnormalities or aberrations.
• Chromosomal aberrations are commonly observed in cancer cells.
In addition to the above, mutation also arise due to change in a single base pair of DNA. This is known as
point mutation. A classical example of such a mutation is sickle cell anemia.
• Deletions and insertions of base pairs of DNA, causes frame-shift mutations (see Chapter 5).
However, there are many chemical and physical factors that induce mutations. These are referred to as
mutagens. UV radiations can cause mutations in organisms - it is a mutagen.
4.8
GENETIC DISORDERS
4.8.1
Pedigree Analysis
• The idea that disorders are inherited has been prevailing in the human society since long. This was based
on the heritability of certain characteristic features in families.
• After the rediscovery of Mendel's work the practice of analysing inheritance pattern of traits in human
beings began.
• Since it is evident that control crosses that can be performed in pea plant or some other organisms, are not
possible in case of human beings, study of the family history about inheritance of a particular trait
provides an alternative.
