• The genotype of the parents can then be written as RRYY and rryy.
• The cross between the two plants can be written down as in Figure 4.7 showing the genotypes of the parent
plants.
• The gametes RY and ry unite on fertilisation to produce the F1 hybrid RrYy.
• When Mendel self hybridised the F1 plants he found that 3/4th of F2 plants had yellow seeds and 1/4th had
green. The yellow and green colours segregated in a 3:1 ratio. Round and wrinkled seed shape also segregated
in a 3:1 ratio: just like in a monohybrid cross.
[NOTE] Read the plate (Figure 4.7 labels). The plate is the Results of a dihybrid cross where the two parents
differed in two pairs of contrasting traits: seed colour and seed shape. The P generation row carries Round
yellow with RR and YY, and Wrinkled green with rr and yy. The Gametes row has RY and ry, uniting into the F1
generation row of RrYy. The Selfing arrow runs to the dihybrid Punnett grid: RRYY, RrYY, RRYy, rrYY, RRyy,
Rryy, rrYy, rryy in the F2 generation; the F1 gametes are the four-letter set RY, Ry, rY, ry. The ratio line under the
grid: Phenotypic ratio: round yellow : round green : wrinkled yellow : wrinkled green 9:3:3:1.
4.3.1
Law of Independent Assortment
• In the dihybrid cross (Figure 4.7), the phenotypes round, yellow; wrinkled, yellow; round, green and
wrinkled, green appeared in the ratio 9:3:3:1. Such a ratio was observed for several pairs of characters that
Mendel studied.
• The ratio of 9:3:3:1 can be derived as a combination series of 3 yellow : 1 green, with 3 round : 1 wrinkled.
This derivation can be written as follows:
1
(3 Round : 1 Wrinkled) (3 Yellow : 1 Green)
2
= 9 Round, Yellow : 3 Wrinkled, Yellow : 3 Round, Green : 1 Wrinkled, Green
Based upon such observations on dihybrid crosses (crosses between plants differing in two traits) Mendel
proposed a second set of generalisations that we call Mendel's Law of Independent Assortment. The law
states that when two pairs of traits are combined in a hybrid, segregation of one pair of characters is
independent of the other pair of characters.
• The Punnett square can be effectively used to understand the independent segregation of the two pairs of
genes during meiosis and the production of eggs and pollen in the F1 RrYy plant.
• Consider the segregation of one pair of genes R and r. Fifty per cent of the gametes have the gene R and
the other 50 per cent have r. Now besides each gamete having either R or r, it should also have the allele Y or
y.
• The important thing to remember here is that segregation of 50 per cent R and 50 per cent r is
independent from the segregation of 50 per cent Y and 50 per cent y.
• Therefore, 50 per cent of the r bearing gametes has Y and the other 50 per cent has y. Similarly, 50 per
cent of the R bearing gametes has Y and the other 50 per cent has y.
• Thus there are four genotypes of gametes (four types of pollen and four types of eggs).
• The four types are RY, Ry, rY and ry each with a frequency of 25 per cent or 1/4 of the total gametes
produced.
• When you write down the four types of eggs and pollen on the two sides of a Punnett square it is very easy
to derive the composition of the zygotes that give rise to the F2 plants (Figure 4.7).
Activity (Figure 4.7 / 4.3.1): write down the 16 F2 genotypes the dihybrid Punnett square yields (RRYY, RRYy,
RRyy, RrYY, ... rryy) and group each under one of the four phenotypes: Round Yellow, Round Green, Wrinkled
Yellow, Wrinkled Green. The four phenotype totals should land at 9 : 3 : 3 : 1.
4.3.2
Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
• Mendel published his work on inheritance of characters in 1865 but for several reasons, it remained
unrecognised till 1900.
• Firstly, communication was not easy (as it is now) in those days and his work could not be widely
publicised.
