BIOLOGY
chromosomes(polyploidy)orchangein a subset of chromosome number
(aneuploidy). This helped in understanding the mutational basis of
geneticdisorders.Down'ssyndrome isdue to trisomy of chromosome 21.
where there isan extra copy of chromosome 21and consequently the
total number ofchromosomebecomes47.In Turner's syndrome,oneX
chromosome is missing and the sex chromosome is as Xo.and in
Klinefelter's syndrome,the condition isXXY.Thesecan be easily studied
by analysis ofKaryotypes.
EXERCISES
Mention the advantages of selectingpeaplantforexperimentbyMendel.
1.
Differentiatebetweenthefollowing-
2.
(a)Dominance and Recessive
(b)Homozygous and Heterozygous
(c)Monohybrid and Dihybrid.
A diploid organism is heterozygous for 4loci.howmany types of gametes
3.
can be produced?
Explain the Law of Dominance using a monohybrid cross.
4.
Define and design a test-cross.
5.
UsingaPunnettSquare,workoutthe distribution of phenotypic features
6.
in the first filial generation after across between a homozygous female
and a heterozygous male for a single locus.
When a cross in made between tall plantwithyellowseeds(TtYy)and
7.
tall plant with green seed(Ttyy).whatproportionsofphenotypein the
offspring could be expected tobe
(a) tall and green.
(b) dwarf and green.
Two heterozygous parents are crossed.If the two loci are linked what
8.
would be the distribution of phenotypic features inF,generation fora
dibybrid cross?
Briefly mention the contribution of T.H.Morgan in genetics.
9.
What is pedigree analysis?Suggest how such an analysis,can be useful.
10.
How is sex determined in human beings?
11.
A child hasbloodgroupO.IfthefatherhasbloodgroupAandmother
12.
bloodgroupB,workoutthegenotypesof the parents and the possible
genotypes of the other offsprings.
13.Explainthefollowingtermswithexample
(a) Co-dominance
(b)Incomplete dominance
Whatispointmutation?Give oneexample.
14.
Who had proposed thechromosomaltheoryoftheinheritance?
15.
78
Mentionanytwoautosomalgeneticdisorderswiththeirsymptoms.
16.
Reprint2026-27